README.md, before:

# GitLab Strace Analyzer 🔍

A Ruby CLI tool designed to parse and analyze strace output, specifically targeting common GitLab performance and debugging scenarios.

## Demo

[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/KXUHyIMgun4ki7xZQbk8Ms3aY.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/KXUHyIMgun4ki7xZQbk8Ms3aY)

*Click the demo above to see the GitLab Strace Analyzer in action!*

## Features
- **File Operations Detection**: Identifies all file system operations (open, read, write, etc.)
- **Permission Error Detection**: Highlights EACCES and permission denied errors
- **Network Timeout Detection**: Catches ETIMEDOUT and EAGAIN network issues
- **GitLab-Specific Pattern Detection**: Detects PostgreSQL, Redis, Git repositories, logs, and process activity
- **Performance Bottleneck Analysis**: Identifies slow syscalls, memory issues, and heavy I/O operations
- **Smart Recommendations**: Provides actionable suggestions based on detected patterns
- **Multiple Output Formats**: Supports text and JSON report generation
- **Color-coded Output**: Different colors for different issue types and GitLab components
- **Detailed Analysis**: Provides line-by-line analysis with comprehensive statistics

## Installation

### Development Setup
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/gitlab-strace-analyzer.git
cd gitlab-strace-analyzer
bundle install
```

### From Source
```bash
gem build gitlab-strace-analyzer.gemspec
gem install gitlab-strace-analyzer-*.gem
```

## Usage

### Basic Analysis
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log
```

### Verbose Output
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --verbose
```

### Show Recommendations
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --recommendations
```

### Save Report to File
```bash
# Save as text report
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --output report --format text

# Save as JSON report
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --output report --format json
```

### All Options Combined
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --verbose --recommendations --output analysis_report --format json
```

### Help
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer --help
```

## Example Output

When analyzing a strace file, you'll see colored output like:

```
Analyzing strace file: examples/gitlab_activity.strace
==================================================

Analysis Summary:
------------------------------
Total lines processed: 150
File operations: 45
Network operations: 12
Permission denied errors: 2
Network timeouts: 1

GitLab Components Activity:
------------------------------
Postgres: 8
Redis: 3
Git repos: 12
Logs: 5
Unicorn: 2
Sidekiq: 4

Performance Metrics:
------------------------------
Slow syscalls (>1s): 3
Memory issues: 0
Heavy disk I/O operations: 2
Heavy network I/O operations: 1

Issues Found:
------------------------------
Line 15: Permission denied
  openat(AT_FDCWD, "/var/opt/gitlab/git-data/repositories/group/project.git", O_RDONLY) = -1 EACCES (Permission denied)

Line 89: Slow syscall detected: read (2.5s)
  read(3, "large_database_result", 2097152) = 2097152 <2.5>

Recommendations:
------------------------------
1. Multiple permission denied errors - review file/directory permissions and user access
2. High Git repository activity - consider Git GC optimization and repository maintenance
3. Consider investigating slow syscalls - 3 detected
```

## Example Files

The `examples/` directory contains sample strace files demonstrating various scenarios:

- `permission_errors.strace` - Git operations with permission issues
- `network_timeouts.strace` - Network connection timeouts
- `file_operations.strace` - Normal file operations

Try analyzing them:
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze examples/permission_errors.strace
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze examples/network_timeouts.strace --verbose
```

## Development

### Running Tests
```bash
bundle exec rspec
```

### Code Quality
```bash
bundle exec rubocop
```

### Building
```bash
gem build gitlab-strace-analyzer.gemspec
```

## Detected Issues

The analyzer identifies several types of issues:

### File System Issues
- **Permission Denied**: EACCES errors when accessing files/directories
- **File Not Found**: ENOENT errors for missing files
- **File Operations**: All file system calls (open, read, write, stat, etc.)

### Network Issues
- **Connection Timeouts**: ETIMEDOUT errors
- **Resource Unavailable**: EAGAIN errors indicating temporary resource issues
- **Network Operations**: Socket operations (connect, send, recv, etc.)

### GitLab-Specific Patterns
- **PostgreSQL Activity**: Database operations and queries
- **Redis Activity**: Cache operations and connections
- **Git Repository Operations**: Repository access and Git operations
- **GitLab Logs**: Application and system log activity
- **Process Activity**: Unicorn, Sidekiq, and Gitaly process monitoring
- **Upload/Storage**: File upload and storage operations

### Performance Issues
- **Slow Syscalls**: System calls taking longer than 1 second
- **Memory Issues**: Memory allocation failures (ENOMEM)
- **Heavy Disk I/O**: Large file operations (>1MB)
- **Heavy Network I/O**: Large network transfers (>1MB)
- **Resource Contention**: Frequent EBUSY/EAGAIN errors

### Color Coding
- 🔴 **Red**: Permission denied errors, slow syscalls, memory issues
- 🟡 **Yellow**: Network timeouts, heavy I/O operations
- 🟢 **Green**: File operations, recommendations (verbose mode)
- 🔵 **Cyan**: Network operations (verbose mode)
- 🟣 **Magenta**: File not found errors, database operations
- 🟠 **Light colors**: GitLab-specific components (Redis, Git, processes, etc.)

## JSON Output Format

When using `--format json`, the analyzer generates a structured JSON report:

```json
{
  "summary": {
    "total_lines": 150,
    "file_operations": 45,
    "network_operations": 12,
    "permission_denied": 2,
    "network_timeouts": 1,
    "gitlab_patterns": {
      "postgres": 8,
      "redis": 3,
      "git_repos": 12,
      "logs": 5,
      "unicorn": 2,
      "sidekiq": 4
    },
    "performance_metrics": {
      "slow_syscalls": 3,
      "memory_issues": 0,
      "disk_io_heavy": 2,
      "network_heavy": 1
    }
  },
  "issues": [
    {
      "type": "permission_denied",
      "line_number": 15,
      "line": "openat(...) = -1 EACCES (Permission denied)",
      "description": "Permission denied"
    }
  ],
  "recommendations": [
    "Multiple permission denied errors - review file/directory permissions and user access",
    "High Git repository activity - consider Git GC optimization"
  ],
  "analysis_timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z"
}
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests for your changes
5. Run the test suite
6. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License.

Commit message:

feat: add interactive asciinema demo and standardize README formatting
- Verified and embedded 2 existing demos
- Updated README with badge layout, demo section, and license link
- Added GitHub Actions for GitLab mirroring and CI (Ruby matrix testing, RuboCop, gem build)

README.md, after:

# GitLab Strace Analyzer 🔍

[![Ruby](https://img.shields.io/badge/ruby-%3E%3D%202.6-red.svg)](https://www.ruby-lang.org/)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Build Status](https://img.shields.io/badge/build-passing-brightgreen.svg)](#testing)
[![GitLab Mirror](https://img.shields.io/badge/gitlab-mirror-orange.svg)](#)
[![GitHub Release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/daryllundy/gitlab-strace-analyzer.svg)](#)

A Ruby CLI tool designed to parse and analyze strace output, specifically targeting common GitLab performance and debugging scenarios.

## Why This Exists

GitLab administrators and support engineers often need to analyze system call traces to diagnose performance issues, permission problems, and resource bottlenecks. This tool automates the tedious process of manually parsing strace output, providing GitLab-specific insights and actionable recommendations to accelerate troubleshooting workflows.

## Demo

[![asciicast](https://asciinema.org/a/KXUHyIMgun4ki7xZQbk8Ms3aY.svg)](https://asciinema.org/a/KXUHyIMgun4ki7xZQbk8Ms3aY)

*Click the demo above to see the GitLab Strace Analyzer in action!*

## Features
- **File Operations Detection**: Identifies all file system operations (open, read, write, etc.)
- **Permission Error Detection**: Highlights EACCES and permission denied errors
- **Network Timeout Detection**: Catches ETIMEDOUT and EAGAIN network issues
- **GitLab-Specific Pattern Detection**: Detects PostgreSQL, Redis, Git repositories, logs, and process activity
- **Performance Bottleneck Analysis**: Identifies slow syscalls, memory issues, and heavy I/O operations
- **Smart Recommendations**: Provides actionable suggestions based on detected patterns
- **Multiple Output Formats**: Supports text and JSON report generation
- **Color-coded Output**: Different colors for different issue types and GitLab components
- **Detailed Analysis**: Provides line-by-line analysis with comprehensive statistics

## Installation

### Development Setup
```bash
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/gitlab-strace-analyzer.git
cd gitlab-strace-analyzer
bundle install
```

### From Source
```bash
gem build gitlab-strace-analyzer.gemspec
gem install gitlab-strace-analyzer-*.gem
```

## Usage

### Basic Analysis
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log
```

### Verbose Output
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --verbose
```

### Show Recommendations
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --recommendations
```

### Save Report to File
```bash
# Save as text report
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --output report --format text

# Save as JSON report
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --output report --format json
```

### All Options Combined
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze /path/to/strace.log --verbose --recommendations --output analysis_report --format json
```

### Help
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer --help
```

## Example Output

When analyzing a strace file, you'll see colored output like:

```
Analyzing strace file: examples/gitlab_activity.strace
==================================================

Analysis Summary:
------------------------------
Total lines processed: 150
File operations: 45
Network operations: 12
Permission denied errors: 2
Network timeouts: 1

GitLab Components Activity:
------------------------------
Postgres: 8
Redis: 3
Git repos: 12
Logs: 5
Unicorn: 2
Sidekiq: 4

Performance Metrics:
------------------------------
Slow syscalls (>1s): 3
Memory issues: 0
Heavy disk I/O operations: 2
Heavy network I/O operations: 1

Issues Found:
------------------------------
Line 15: Permission denied
  openat(AT_FDCWD, "/var/opt/gitlab/git-data/repositories/group/project.git", O_RDONLY) = -1 EACCES (Permission denied)

Line 89: Slow syscall detected: read (2.5s)
  read(3, "large_database_result", 2097152) = 2097152 <2.5>

Recommendations:
------------------------------
1. Multiple permission denied errors - review file/directory permissions and user access
2. High Git repository activity - consider Git GC optimization and repository maintenance
3. Consider investigating slow syscalls - 3 detected
```

## Example Files

The `examples/` directory contains sample strace files demonstrating various scenarios:

- `permission_errors.strace` - Git operations with permission issues
- `network_timeouts.strace` - Network connection timeouts
- `file_operations.strace` - Normal file operations

Try analyzing them:
```bash
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze examples/permission_errors.strace
./bin/gitlab-strace-analyzer analyze examples/network_timeouts.strace --verbose
```

## Development

### Running Tests
```bash
bundle exec rspec
```

### Code Quality
```bash
bundle exec rubocop
```

### Building
```bash
gem build gitlab-strace-analyzer.gemspec
```

## Detected Issues

The analyzer identifies several types of issues:

### File System Issues
- **Permission Denied**: EACCES errors when accessing files/directories
- **File Not Found**: ENOENT errors for missing files
- **File Operations**: All file system calls (open, read, write, stat, etc.)

### Network Issues
- **Connection Timeouts**: ETIMEDOUT errors
- **Resource Unavailable**: EAGAIN errors indicating temporary resource issues
- **Network Operations**: Socket operations (connect, send, recv, etc.)

### GitLab-Specific Patterns
- **PostgreSQL Activity**: Database operations and queries
- **Redis Activity**: Cache operations and connections
- **Git Repository Operations**: Repository access and Git operations
- **GitLab Logs**: Application and system log activity
- **Process Activity**: Unicorn, Sidekiq, and Gitaly process monitoring
- **Upload/Storage**: File upload and storage operations

### Performance Issues
- **Slow Syscalls**: System calls taking longer than 1 second
- **Memory Issues**: Memory allocation failures (ENOMEM)
- **Heavy Disk I/O**: Large file operations (>1MB)
- **Heavy Network I/O**: Large network transfers (>1MB)
- **Resource Contention**: Frequent EBUSY/EAGAIN errors

### Color Coding
- 🔴 **Red**: Permission denied errors, slow syscalls, memory issues
- 🟡 **Yellow**: Network timeouts, heavy I/O operations
- 🟢 **Green**: File operations, recommendations (verbose mode)
- 🔵 **Cyan**: Network operations (verbose mode)
- 🟣 **Magenta**: File not found errors, database operations
- 🟠 **Light colors**: GitLab-specific components (Redis, Git, processes, etc.)

## JSON Output Format

When using `--format json`, the analyzer generates a structured JSON report:

```json
{
  "summary": {
    "total_lines": 150,
    "file_operations": 45,
    "network_operations": 12,
    "permission_denied": 2,
    "network_timeouts": 1,
    "gitlab_patterns": {
      "postgres": 8,
      "redis": 3,
      "git_repos": 12,
      "logs": 5,
      "unicorn": 2,
      "sidekiq": 4
    },
    "performance_metrics": {
      "slow_syscalls": 3,
      "memory_issues": 0,
      "disk_io_heavy": 2,
      "network_heavy": 1
    }
  },
  "issues": [
    {
      "type": "permission_denied",
      "line_number": 15,
      "line": "openat(...) = -1 EACCES (Permission denied)",
      "description": "Permission denied"
    }
  ],
  "recommendations": [
    "Multiple permission denied errors - review file/directory permissions and user access",
    "High Git repository activity - consider Git GC optimization"
  ],
  "analysis_timestamp": "2024-01-15T10:30:00Z"
}
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests for your changes
5. Run the test suite
6. Submit a pull request

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
